Title: Cheap Trick

----

Subtitle: *Trompe l’oeil*, photography and kitsch as economies of ‘the real’ in the discourses of modernity

----

Author: Anna Daly

----

Abstract: Critical accounts of kitsch that have been prompted by Clement Greenberg’s 1939 theorisation of avant-garde art bear more than a passing resemblance to the nineteenth-century critical reception of trompe l’oeil painting. Each of these critiques either accuse kitsch or trompe l’oeil artefacts of being both instigators and disseminators of a debased reality—a reality connected to the first waves of industrialised culture. This article examines the resemblances between these criticisms of kitsch and trompe l’oeil, especially in terms of what they reveal about the formalist-modernist conceptualisation of reality. By reviewing the literature that positions trompe l’oeil, photography and kitsch as superficially realistic modes of representation, the article aims to shed light on the discursive relations that produced a particular cultural conception of ‘reality’. The implications of this approach have been well rehearsed in postmodern and post-structuralist accounts of mass culture, but the present discussion takes a different route by suggesting that a similar spirit of revision could be applied to artefacts that were not mass produced. This proves to be the case particularly where, as with nineteenth-century trompe l’oeil paintings, such artefacts have also been derided as cultural forms.

----

Text:

##Introduction
In 1761, Denis Diderot described two paintings of bas-reliefs by Jean-Baptiste d’Oudry in the following way: ‘The hand touched a flat surface; but the eye, still seduced, saw relief; to the extent that one could have asked a philosopher, which of these two contradictory senses was a liar?’[^1] In his 1761, 1763 and 1765 Salons, Diderot continued to struggle with the relationship between painting that he deemed illusionistic and a particular notion of artistic truth. In 1763, though, he was simply disdainful of Roland de la Porte’s 1760 painting Medallion Portrait of King Louis XV (fig. 1). Here Diderot commented that ‘Roland de la Porte is precisely one of those painters who lack this sublime: he is nothing more than a producer of trompe l’oeil.’[^2]

(image: mirz150017_1.jpg caption: This is an image caption for reference, of a ‘false’ phenomenal reality, 2019)

The following discussion presents some of the ways that, since Diderot’s Salons, trompe l’oeil, photography and kitsch have each been used to mobilise a modernist and protomodernist conception of reality. Indeed, the sustained attacks on trompe l’oeil—which only let up when these ceased to be the kind of paintings that serious artists produced— and photography reveal striking resemblances to the critical accounts of kitsch, which only surfaced in the twentieth century. The essay moves back-and-forth between late eighteenth-century, nineteenth- and twentieth-century critical discourses on trompe l’oeil, always immediately apparent. To be more precise, what counts as ‘illusionism’ here is underwritten by an absolute distinction between empirical reality—that associated with the physical world—and pictorial reality—that associated with representational realism—but on closer examination, these realities and the distinctions between them prove to be historically and culturally specific. At the same time, these disparate discourses all share the conception of a ‘false’ phenomenal reality that is positioned against the ideal of ‘art’. Analysing these discourses—including the writings of Diderot, John Ruskin, Clarence Cooke, Clement Greenberg and Ernst Gombrich—clarifies the extent to which modernist invocations of phenomenal reality were defined by trompe l’oeil, photography and kitsch.

Piet Mondrian’s essays on plasticity, the Marxist-inspired critiques of mass culture characterising the Frankfurt School’s and Greenberg’s Marxist critiques of mass culture typify the critical discourse on kitsch.[^3] Frankfurt School theorists such as Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno presented mass culture as a force that generated a ‘false consciousness’ designed to keep the proletarian workforce happy and, thus, oblivious to the real conditions of an existence defined by exploitation. Traces of these sentiments can be discerned in Greenberg’s critique of ‘kitsch’ as a parasitic visual culture that jeopardised art’s cultural value. This critical tenor is also present, though less trenchant, in the 1980s and 1990s in the writings of philosopher Thomas Kulka and literary critic Matei Calinescu. Both writers critically examined the modernist use of the term ‘kitsch’ but, in keeping with the twentieth-century tradition of analytic philosophy, they did so without adopting the culturally relativist position associated with postmodern theories

[^1]: Diderot, 1761, [1876], p. 146
[^2]: Jean Seznec, 2011, p. 123.
[^3]: Specifically Greenberg’s 1939 essay ‘Avant-garde and Kitsch’,